The first part of the story introduces the main characters as children. We see that both Binyomin and Pinchas are interested in reaching spiritual heights, and they are close friends. They learn together, build things together, grow together.

However, things happen. Binyomin's father loses his job, and can no longer afford to send him to yeshiva, so Binyomin ends up in public school. Pinchas remains in a Jewish school, but a nasty teacher replaces Zusha and kills Pinchas' optimism. This distresses Binyomin, but there is little that he can do. Himself assailed on all sides in his new environment, it is fight just to maintain his own identity. Now that his own friend is submerged in depression, Binyomin seeks solace in prayer and books. In the meantime, the cheder teacher is replaced again, but he does not have the same fire as Zusha did. Pinchas is disillusioned and Binyomin remains in public school until graduation, a lone Jew in the wilderness.

Eventually, Binyomin and Pinchas split ways, because Pinchas cannot accept that G-d would allow evil to exist. He rejects the whole idea of tzimtzum, and the necessity of suffering in particular. He concludes that G-d hates mankind and enjoys seeing suffering in the world. The friends lose contact soon after graduation; Pinchas goes to a private college in California, while Binyomin stays behind and goes to a local public community college.

Binyomin's parents, however, see the pain he is experiencing. After repeated requests to go to Yeshiva, his parents give in, on condition that he returns to college afterwards. So, he goes to a Lubavitcher yeshiva with a need-based scholarship. Already highly knowledgeable due to his independent studies from before, he quickly moves on to a more advanced class. There he discovers the world of Chassidus, and a old friend - Zusha! Gifted with a phenomenal memory, he quickly outstrips that class, too. He moves to different yeshiva.

Later, when the erstwhile friends meet again, Binyomin discovers that Pinchas has gone far, far over to the other side. He has traveled to Asia to learn prophecy and black magic, having decided that if Mankind is to derive spiritual fulfillment, he must exploit the spiritual structure of the universe, and take it from the level of Achorayim.

Shocked, Binyomin departs from Pinchas. Tortured by the pain he sees in his friend, he decides to wander in a self-imposed exile, to discover the truth. During his travels, Binyomin develops his knowledge of the heavens.

In the meantime, however, Pinchas is developing a powerful movement. Numbering in the tens of thousands, his followers are growing at a rapid pace. Pinchas has taught his inner circle of followers the forbidden secrets of Black Magic, who attract attention though public exhibitions of their powers. The group calls itself the Rebels of Pinchas.

On hearing news of this, Binyomin descends into depression. Slowly he feels his spirit stretching thin, and is unable to feel emotion. Realizing this, and ashamed of how low he has fallen, he becomes a recluse, keeping only a few shreds of his former, spiritual lifestyle. He tells his Yetser, "Just because I didn't do one mitzvah, now you are telling me to stop another?! Begone!" But he knows that he is suffering from timtum halev.

And so a year passes. The Rebels now number in the hundreds of thousands.

Somehow, Binyomin recovers a small spark of motivation. Not much, but just enough to realize it is time to return to the yeshiva. There, he re-establishes contact with his old teacher, Zusha. Telling him about what happened over the exile, Binyomin asks Zusha if he will become his Mashpia. Zusha agrees.

That Shabbos, Binyomin hears the meditative nigun of B'nei Heichala. In the end of the nigun, he hears the verse, "It is His revealed will to nullify all the Klipos." This reignites the spark of hope within him, and he resolves to develop his fighting spirit, to accomplish the Will of His Creator.

But, he still knows that his powers are not strong enough to fight the Rebels. He approaches Zusha again for help, and they review the Tanya once more.